PRODUCT MONOGRAPH
Pr

DEXILANT®

Dexlansoprazole
delayed release capsules 30 mg and 60 mg
H+, K+ - ATPase Inhibitor

Takeda Canada Inc.
Toronto, Ontario M5H 4E3

Date of Revision:
January 06, 2020

Submission Control No: 231640

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 1 of 38

Table of Contents

PART I: HEALTH PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION ......................................................... 3
SUMMARY PRODUCT INFORMATION........................................................................ 3
INDICATIONS AND CLINICAL USE ............................................................................. 3
CONTRAINDICATIONS ................................................................................................... 3
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS ................................................................................. 4
ADVERSE REACTIONS ................................................................................................... 8
DRUG INTERACTIONS ................................................................................................. 11
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................. 14
OVERDOSAGE ................................................................................................................ 15
ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY ............................................................ 15
STORAGE AND STABILITY ......................................................................................... 20
DOSAGE FORMS, COMPOSITION AND PACKAGING............................................. 20
PART II: SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION ............................................................................... 21
PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION ......................................................................... 21
CLINICAL TRIALS ......................................................................................................... 21
DETAILED PHARMACOLOGY .................................................................................... 26
TOXICOLOGY ................................................................................................................. 28
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 32
PART III: PATIENT MEDICATION INFORMATION........................................................ 34

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 2 of 38

Pr

DEXILANT®

Dexlansoprazole delayed release capsules, 30 mg and 60 mg
PART I: HEALTH PROFESSIONAL INFORMATION
SUMMARY PRODUCT INFORMATION
Route of
Administration

Dosage Form /
Strength

Oral, Nasogastric

Delayed Release
Capsule
30 mg, 60 mg

Clinically Relevant Nonmedicinal
Ingredients
None
For a complete listing see DOSAGE FORMS,
COMPOSITION AND PACKAGING section.

INDICATIONS AND CLINICAL USE
DEXILANT® is indicated for the following in patients 12 years of age and older:
Healing of Erosive Esophagitis
DEXILANT® is indicated for healing of all grades of erosive esophagitis (EE) for up to 8 weeks.
Maintenance of Healed Erosive Esophagitis
DEXILANT® is indicated for maintaining healing of erosive esophagitis for up to 4 months in
adolescents 12 to 17 years of age and up to 6 months in adults.
Symptomatic Non-Erosive Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
DEXILANT® is indicated for the treatment of heartburn associated with symptomatic nonerosive gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) for 4 weeks.
Pediatrics (12 to 17 years of age):
DEXILANT® is indicated for treatment of heartburn associated with symptomatic non-erosive
GERD, healing of all grades of EE, and maintenance of healed EE in adolescents 12 to 17 years
of age (See CLINICAL TRIALS, Pediatric Studies)
Safety and effectiveness of DEXILANT® in children under 12 years of age have not been
established (See WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Special Populations, Pediatrics).
Geriatrics (> 65 years of age):
No dosage adjustment is necessary for elderly patients.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
• Patients who are hypersensitive to this drug or to any ingredient in the formulation. For a
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 3 of 38

complete listing, see DOSAGE FORMS, COMPOSITION AND PACKAGING.
•

Co-administration with rilpivirine is contraindicated.

WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS
General
Symptomatic response with DEXILANT® does not preclude the presence of gastric malignancy.
Antibiotic Combination Therapy
Pseudomembranous colitis has been reported with nearly all antibacterial agents, including
clarithromycin and amoxicillin, and may range in severity from mild to life threatening.
Therefore, it is important to consider this diagnosis in patients who present with diarrhea
subsequent to the administration of antibacterial agents.
Treatment with antibacterial agents alters the normal flora of the colon and may permit
overgrowth of Clostridia. Studies indicate that a toxin produced by Clostridium difficile is a
primary cause of “antibiotic-associated colitis”.
After the diagnosis of pseudomembranous colitis has been established, therapeutic measures
should be initiated. Mild cases of pseudomembranous colitis usually respond to discontinuation
of the drug alone. In moderate to severe cases, consideration should be given to management
with fluids and electrolytes, protein supplementation, and treatment with an antibacterial drug
clinically effective against Clostridium difficile colitis.
Clostridium Difficile-Associated Diarrhea
Decreased gastric acidity due to any means, including proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), increases
gastric counts of bacteria normally present in the gastrointestinal tract. Treatment with proton
pump inhibitors (PPIs) can lead to an increased risk of gastrointestinal infections such as
Salmonella, Campylobacter and Clostridium difficile.
An increased risk for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) and Clostridium difficile-associated
diarrhea (CDAD) has been observed in association with PPI use in several observational studies.
CDI/CDAD should be considered in the differential diagnosis for diarrhea that does not improve.
Additional risk factors for CDI and CDAD include recent hospitalization, the use of antibiotics,
old age and the presence of co-morbidities.
Patients should be prescribed PPIs at the lowest dose and for the shortest duration required for the
condition being treated and be reassessed to ascertain whether continued PPI therapy remains
beneficial.
Concomitant Use with Methotrexate
Literature suggests that concomitant use of PPIs with methotrexate (primarily at high dose) may
elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite, possibly leading to
methotrexate toxicities. A temporary withdrawal of the PPI may be considered in some patients
receiving treatments with high dose methotrexate.
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 4 of 38

Bone Fracture
Several published observational studies suggest that PPI therapy may be associated with an
increased risk for osteoporosis-related fractures of the hip, wrist, or spine. The risk of fracture
was increased in patients who received high-dose, defined as multiple daily doses, and long-term
PPI therapy (a year or longer). Patients should use the lowest dose and shortest duration of PPI
therapy appropriate to the condition being treated. Patients at risk for osteoporosis-related
fractures should be managed according to established treatment guidelines (see DOSAGE AND
ADMINISTRATION and ADVERSE REACTIONS).
Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis
Dexlansoprazole was positive in the Ames test for mutagenicity in bacteria. In an in vitro
chromosome aberration test using Chinese hamster lung cells, dexlansoprazole was considered
positive based on equivocal data in which the percentage of cells with aberrant chromosomes
increased slightly but did not reach the pre-set criteria for a positive response. Dexlansoprazole
was negative in the in vivo mouse micronucleus test.
Lansoprazole is a racemic mixture of R- and S-enantiomers. Following administration of
lansoprazole in humans and animals, the major component circulating in plasma is
dexlansoprazole, the R-enantiomer of lansoprazole. Therefore, the carcinogenic potential of
dexlansoprazole was assessed using existing lansoprazole studies (see TOXICOLOGY).
Lansoprazole treatment for 2-years was associated with hyperplasia and neoplasms (carcinoids)
of enterochromaffin-like cells (ECL cells) in the stomach of conventional rats and mice. These
proliferations are related to prolonged hypergastrinemia secondary to gastric acid suppression.
Benign tumors of the testis (interstitial cell adenomas in rats and rete testis adenomas in mice)
were secondary to an inhibitory effect on testosterone synthesis at high doses in these species.
Hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas were increased in the livers of mice related to induction
of CYP enzymes leading to increased liver weights.
Drug Interactions with Antiretroviral Drugs
PPIs have been reported to interact with some antiretroviral drugs. The clinical importance and
the mechanisms behind these interactions are not always known. A change in gastric pH may
change the absorption of the antiretroviral drug. Other possible mechanisms are via CYP 2Cl9.
Rilpivirine
Co-administration is contraindicated due to significant decrease in rilpivirine exposure and loss
of therapeutic effect (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).
Atazanavir and Nelfinavir
Co-administration with atazanavir or nelfinavir is not recommended due to decreased atazanavir
and nelfinavir exposure (see the REYATAZ® and VIRACEPT® Product Monographs).
If the combination of DEXILANT® with atazanavir is judged unavoidable, close clinical
monitoring is recommended in combination with the use of 400 mg atazanavir/100 mg ritonavir
dose; the dose of DEXILANT® should not exceed an equivalent dose of omeprazole of 20 mg
daily (see REYATAZ® Product Monograph).

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 5 of 38

Saquinavir
If DEXILANT® is co-administered with saquinavir/ritonavir, caution and monitoring for
potential saquinavir toxicities, including gastrointestinal symptoms, increased triglycerides, deep
vein thrombosis and QT prolongation, are recommended. Dose reduction of saquinavir should be
considered from the safety perspective for individual patients (see INVIRASE® Product
Monograph).
Endocrine and Metabolism
Hypomagnesemia
Hypomagnesemia, symptomatic and asymptomatic, has been reported rarely in patients treated
with PPIs for at least three months, in most cases after a year of therapy. Serious adverse events
include tetany, arrhythmias, and seizures. In most patients, treatment of hypomagnesemia
required magnesium replacement and discontinuation of the PPI.
For patients expected to be on prolonged treatment or who take PPIs with medications such as
digoxin or drugs that may cause hypomagnesemia (e.g., diuretics), health care professionals may
consider monitoring magnesium levels prior to initiation of PPI treatment and periodically (see
ADVERSE REACTIONS).
The chronic use of PPIs may lead to hypomagnesaemia. Moreover, hypokalemia and
hypocalcemia have been reported in the literature as accompanying electrolyte disorders.
Cyanocobalamin (Vitamin B12) Deficiency
The prolonged use of proton pump inhibitors may impair the absorption of protein-bound
Vitamin B12 and may contribute to the development of cyanocobalamin (Vitamin B12)
deficiency.
Genitourinary
Testicular interstitial cell adenoma occurred in 1 of 30 rats treated with 50 mg/kg/day of
lansoprazole (13 times the recommended human dose based on body surface area) in a one-year
toxicity study (see TOXICOLOGY, Carcinogenicity).
These changes are associated with endocrine alterations which have not been, to date, observed in
humans.
Gastrointestinal
Long-term use of DEXILANT® is associated with an increased risk of fundic gland polyps,
especially beyond one year (see ADVERSE REACTIONS, Post-Market Adverse Drug
Reactions). Most fundic gland polyps are asymptomatic. Use the lowest dose and shortest
duration of PPI therapy appropriate to the condition being treated.
Interference with Laboratory Tests
During treatment with antisecretory drugs, chromogranin A (CgA) increases due to decreased
gastric acidity. Increased CgA levels may interfere with investigations for neuroendocrine
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 6 of 38

tumours. To avoid this interference, DEXILANT® treatment should be stopped 14 days before
CgA measurements (See DRUG INTERACTIONS).
Special Populations
Pregnant Women:
There are no adequate or well-controlled studies in pregnant women with DEXILANT®.
Exposure in clinical trials was very limited. DEXILANT® should not be administered to pregnant
women unless the expected benefits outweigh the potential risks. See TOXICOLOGY,
Reproduction and Teratology.
Nursing Women:
It is not known whether dexlansoprazole is excreted in human milk. However, lansoprazole (the
racemate) and its metabolites are excreted in the milk of rats. As many drugs are excreted in
human milk, DEXILANT® should not be given to nursing mothers unless its use is considered
essential. In this case nursing should be avoided.
Pediatrics (12 to 17 years of age):
Safety and effectiveness of DEXILANT® in children under 12 years of age have not been
established.
DEXILANT should not be used in pediatric patients less than one year of age because
lansoprazole (the racemic mixture) was not effective for the treatment of symptomatic GERD in a
multicenter, double-blind controlled trial. In addition, toxicology studies with lansoprazole have
shown heart valve thickening and bone changes in juvenile rats (See TOXICOLOGY, Juvenile
Animal Toxicity Data).
DEXILANT® is indicated for adolescents 12 to 17 years of age, and is supported by evidence
from adequate and well-controlled studies of dexlansoprazole in adults, and by additional
efficacy, safety and pharmacokinetic data in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age for the treatment of
heartburn associated with symptomatic non-erosive GERD, healing of all grades of EE, and
maintenance of healed EE (See ADVERSE REACTIONS, Clinical trial adverse drug reactions
(pediatrics), CLINICAL TRIALS, Pediatric studies, and ACTION AND CLINICAL
PHARMACOLOGY, Special Populations and Conditions).
Geriatrics (> 65 years of age):
In clinical studies of DEXILANT®, 11% of patients were aged 65 years and over. No overall
differences in safety or effectiveness were observed between these patients and younger patients.
No dosage adjustment is necessary for elderly patients. See ACTION AND CLINICAL
PHARMACOLOGY, Special Populations and Conditions.
Benefits of use of PPIs should be weighed against the increased risk of fractures as patients in
this category (> 71 years of age) may already be at high risk for osteoporosis-related fractures. If
the use of PPIs is required, they should be managed carefully according to established treatment
guidelines (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION and ADVERSE REACTIONS)
Hepatic Impairment:
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 7 of 38

No dosage adjustment is necessary for patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class
A). A maximum daily dose of 30 mg should be considered for patients with moderate hepatic
impairment (Child-Pugh Class B). No studies have been conducted in patients with severe
hepatic impairment. See ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Special Populations
and Conditions.
Renal Impairment:
No dosage adjustment is necessary for patients with renal impairment. See ACTION AND
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Special Populations and Conditions.
Immune
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus:
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) has been reported with the use of PPIs. If
lesions occur, especially in sun-exposed areas of the skin, and if accompanied by arthralgia, the
patient should seek medical help promptly and the health care professional should consider
stopping DEXILANT®. The occurrence of SCLE with previous PPI treatment may increase the
risk of SCLE with other PPIs (see ADVERSE REACTIONS, Post-Market Adverse Drug
Reactions).
ADVERSE REACTIONS
Clinical Trial Adverse Drug Reactions
Because clinical trials are conducted under very specific conditions the adverse reaction rates
observed in the clinical trials may not reflect the rates observed in practice and should not be
compared to the rates in the clinical trials of another drug. Adverse drug reaction information
from clinical trials is useful for identifying drug-related adverse events and for approximating
rates.
Adults
The safety of DEXILANT® was evaluated in 4548 patients in controlled and uncontrolled clinical
studies (30 mg, 60 mg, and 90 mg), including 863 patients treated for at least 6 months and 282
patients treated for one year. Patients ranged in age from 18 to 90 years (median age 48 years),
with 54% female, 85% Caucasian, 8% Black, 4% Asian and 3% other races. Six randomized
controlled clinical trials were conducted for the treatment of erosive esophagitis, maintenance of
healed erosive esophagitis, and symptomatic GERD, which included 896 patients on placebo,
2621 patients on DEXILANT® 30 mg or 60 mg and 1363 patients on lansoprazole 30 mg.
The following adverse events were reported to have a possible or definite treatment-relationship
to DEXILANT® in 1% or more of the treated patients in placebo and positive-controlled clinical
trials (Tables 1 and 2, respectively). Numbers in parentheses indicate the percentage of the
adverse events reported.
Table 1: Incidence of Possibly or Definitely Treatment-Related Adverse Events in
Placebo Controlled Studies
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 8 of 38

Body System
Adverse Event
Gastrointestinal disorders
Diarrhea
Abdominal Pain
Nausea
Flatulence
Constipation
Nervous system disorders
Headache

Placebo
(N=896)
n (%)

DEXILANT®
30 mg and 60 mg
(N=1399)
n (%)

17 (1.9)
14 (1.6)
16 (1.8)
5 (0.6)
9 (1.0)

52 (3.7)
37 (2.6)
31 (2.2)
25 (1.8)
15 (1.1)

21 (2.3)

31 (2.2)

Table 2: Incidence of Possibly or Definitely Treatment-Related Adverse Events in
Active Controlled Clinical Trials
DEXILANT®
Lansoprazole
60 mg and 90 mg
30 mg
Body System
(N=1374)
(N=1363)
Adverse Event
n (%)
n (%)
Gastrointestinal disorders
Diarrhea
44 (3.2)
28 (2.1)
Abdominal pain
21 (1.5)
19 (1.4)
Nausea
14 (1.0)
18 (1.3)
Nervous system disorders
Headache
16 (1.2)
19 (1.4)
In placebo-controlled studies, gastrointestinal adverse reactions other than constipation occurred
at a higher incidence for DEXILANT® than placebo. In active-controlled studies, diarrhea
occurred at a higher incidence for DEXILANT® than lansoprazole. The incidence of other
common adverse reactions for DEXILANT® were similar to or lower than placebo or
lansoprazole.
Less Common Clinical Trial Adverse Drug Reactions (<1%)
Other adverse reactions that were reported for DEXILANT® (30 mg, 60 mg or 90 mg) in
controlled studies at an incidence of less than 1% are listed below by body system:
Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders: anemia, lymphadenopathy
Cardiac Disorders: acute myocardial infarction, angina, arrhythmia, bradycardia, edema,
palpitations, tachycardia
Ear and Labyrinth Disorders: ear pain, tinnitus, vertigo
Endocrine Disorders: goiter
Eye Disorders: eye irritation, eye swelling
Gastrointestinal Disorders: abdominal discomfort, abdominal tenderness, abnormal feces, anal
discomfort, Barrett’s esophagus, bezoar, bowel sounds abnormal, breath odor, colitis
microscopic, colonic polyp, dry mouth, duodenitis, dyspepsia, dysphagia, enteritis, eructation,
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 9 of 38

esophagitis, gastric polyp, gastritis, gastroenteritis, gastrointestinal disorders, gastrointestinal
hypermotility disorders, GERD, GI ulcers and perforation, hematemesis, hematochezia,
hemorrhoids, impaired gastric emptying, irritable bowel syndrome, mucus stools, oral mucosal
blistering, painful defecation, paresthesia oral, proctitis, rectal hemorrhage, vomiting
General Disorders and Administration Site Conditions: adverse drug reaction, asthenia, chest
pain, chills, feeling abnormal, inflammation, mucosal inflammation, nodule, pain, pyrexia
Hepatobiliary Disorders: biliary colic, cholelithiasis, hepatomegaly
Immune System Disorders: hypersensitivity
Infections and Infestations: candida infections, influenza, nasopharyngitis, oral herpes,
pharyngitis, sinusitis, upper respiratory tract infection, viral infection, vulvo-vaginal infection
Injury, Poisoning and Procedural Complications: overdose, procedural pain, sunburn
Laboratory Investigations: ALP increased, ALT increased, AST increased, bilirubin
decreased/increased, blood creatinine increased, blood gastrin increased, blood glucose increased,
blood potassium increased, liver function test abnormal, platelet count decreased, total protein
increased, weight increased
Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders: appetite changes, hypercalcemia, hypokalemia
Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders: arthralgia, arthritis, muscle cramps,
musculoskeletal pain, myalgia
Nervous System Disorders: altered taste, convulsion, dizziness, memory impairment, migraine,
paresthesia, psychomotor hyperactivity, tremor, trigeminal neuralgia
Psychiatric Disorders: abnormal dreams, anxiety, depression, insomnia, libido changes
Renal and Urinary Disorders: dysuria, micturition urgency
Reproductive System and Breast Disorders: dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, menorrhagia, menstrual
disorder
Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders: aspiration, asthma, bronchitis, cough,
dyspnoea, hiccups, hyperventilation, respiratory tract congestion, sore throat
Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders: acne, dermatitis, erythema, pruritus, rash, skin lesion,
urticaria
Vascular Disorders: deep vein thrombosis, hot flush, hypertension
Additional adverse reactions that were reported for DEXILANT® (60 mg or 90 mg) in a longterm uncontrolled study included: anaphylaxis, auditory hallucination, B-cell lymphoma, bursitis,
central obesity, cholecystitis acute, decreased hemoglobin, dehydration, diabetes mellitus,
dysphonia, epistaxis, folliculitis, gout, herpes zoster, hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia,
hypothyroidism, increased neutrophils, MCHC decreased, neutropenia, oral soft tissue disorder,
rectal tenesmus, restless legs syndrome, somnolence, thrombocythemia, tonsillitis.
Pediatrics
The safety of DEXILANT® was evaluated in controlled and single-arm clinical trials including
166 adolescents, 12 to 17 years of age for the treatment of symptomatic non-erosive GERD,
healing of EE, maintenance of healed EE and relief of heartburn (See CLINICAL TRIALS,
Pediatric Studies).
The adverse reaction profile was similar to that of adults. The most common adverse reactions
that occurred in ≥ 5% of patients were headache, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nasopharyngitis and
oropharyngeal pain.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 10 of 38

Post-Market Adverse Drug Reactions
Adverse reactions have been identified during post-marketing surveillance of DEXILANT®. As
these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not always
possible to reliably estimate their frequency or establish a causal relationship to drug exposure.
Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders: autoimmune hemolytic anemia, idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura
Ear and Labyrinth Disorders: deafness
Eye Disorders: blurred vision
Gastrointestinal Disorders: oral edema, pancreatitis
General Disorders and Administration Site Conditions: facial edema
Hepatobiliary Disorders: drug-induced hepatitis
Immune System Disorders: anaphylactic shock (requiring emergency intervention), exfoliative
dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis (some fatal)
Metabolism and Nutritional Disorders: hypomagnesemia, hyponatremia
Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue: Osteoporosis and osteoporosis-related fractures
Nervous System Disorders: cerebrovascular accident, transient ischaemic attack
Renal and Urinary Disorders: acute renal failure
Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders: pharyngeal edema, throat tightness
Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders: generalized rash, leucocytoclastic vasculitis
Withdrawal of long-term PPI therapy can lead to aggravation of acid related symptoms and may
result in rebound acid hypersecretion.
There have been post-marketing reports of subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) (see
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS, Immune).
There have been post-marketing reports of fundic gland polyps (FGPs) (see WARNINGS AND
PRECAUTIONS, Gastrointestinal).
DRUG INTERACTIONS
Drug-Drug Interactions
Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption Pharmacokinetics
It is theoretically possible that DEXILANT® may interfere with the absorption of other drugs
where gastric pH is an important determinant of oral bioavailability (e.g., Ampicillin esters,
digoxin, iron salts, ketoconazole).
Cytochrome P 450 Interactions
DEXILANT® is metabolized, in part, by CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 (see ACTION AND
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Metabolism).
In vitro studies have shown that dexlansoprazole is not likely to inhibit CYP isoforms 1A1, 1A2,
2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2D6, 2E1 or 3A4. As such, no clinically relevant interactions with drugs
metabolized by these CYP enzymes would be expected. Furthermore, in vivo studies showed that
DEXILANT® did not have an impact on the pharmacokinetics of, coadministered phenytoin
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 11 of 38

(CYP2C9 substrate) or theophylline (CYP1A2 substrate).1 The subjects’ CYP1A2 genotypes in
the drug-drug interaction study with theophylline were not determined. Although in vitro studies
indicated that DEXILANT® has the potential to inhibit CYP2C19 in vivo, an in vivo drug-drug
interaction study in mainly CYP2C19 extensive and intermediate metabolizers has shown that
DEXILANT® does not affect the pharmacokinetics of diazepam (CYP2C19 substrate).
Warfarin
In a study of 20 healthy subjects, co-administration of DEXILANT® 90 mg once daily for 11
days with a single 25 mg oral dose of warfarin on day 6 did not result in any significant
differences in the pharmacokinetics of warfarin or INR compared to administration of warfarin
with placebo.1 However, there have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in
patients receiving PPIs and warfarin concomitantly. Patients treated with PPIs and warfarin
concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
Concomitant Use of Antacids with DEXILANT®
No formal drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with DEXILANT® and antacids. Drugdrug interactions studies were performed with the racemate lansoprazole and antacids.
Simultaneous administration of lansoprazole with aluminum and magnesium hydroxide or
magaldrate results in lower peak plasma levels, but does not significantly reduce bioavailability.
Antacids may be used concomitantly if required. In clinical trials, antacids were administered
concomitantly with lansoprazole delayed-release capsules. In a single-dose crossover study when
30 mg of lansoprazole was administered concomitantly with one gram of sucralfate in healthy
volunteers, absorption of lansoprazole was delayed and its bioavailability was reduced. The
value of lansoprazole AUC was reduced by 17% and that for Cmax was reduced by 21%. In a
similar study when 30 mg of lansoprazole was administered concomitantly with 2 grams of
sucralfate, lansoprazole AUC and Cmax were reduced by 32% and 55%, respectively. When
lansoprazole dosing occurred 30 minutes prior to sucralfate administration, Cmax was reduced by
only 28% and there was no statistically significant difference in lansoprazole AUC. Therefore,
lansoprazole should be administered at least 30 minutes prior to sucralfate. It would be expected
that similar results would be seen with DEXILANT®.
Theophylline
Although a study of the use of concomitant theophylline and dexlansoprazole did not reveal any
changes in the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of theophylline, individual patients
should monitor their theophylline level while taking the two drugs concomitantly.
Tacrolimus
Concomitant administration of dexlansoprazole and tacrolimus may increase whole blood levels
of tacrolimus, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor metabolizers of
CYP2C19.
Clopidogrel
Concomitant administration of dexlansoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no
clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrelinduced platelet inhibition (see DETAILED PHARMACOLOGY). No dose adjustment of
clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of DEXILANT®.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 12 of 38

Methotrexate
Case reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest
that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose) may elevate
and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However,
no formal drug interaction studies of methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted.
Rilpivirine
Co-administration is contraindicated due to significant decrease in rilpivirine exposure and loss
of therapeutic effect (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).
Atazanavir
Co-administration of DEXILANT® with atazanavir is not recommended. Concomitant
administration of omeprazole (20 or 40 mg once daily) substantially reduced plasma Cmax and
AUC of atazanavir in healthy volunteers administered atazanavir or atazanavir/ritonavir. (see
REYATAZ® Product Monograph).
Nelfinavir
Co-administration of DEXILANT® with nelfinavir is not recommended. Concomitant
administration of omeprazole (40 mg daily) with nelfinavir (1250 mg twice daily) markedly
reduced the AUC and Cmax for nelfinavir (by 36% and 37%, respectively) and its active
metabolite M8 (by 92% and 89%, respectively) (see VIRACEPT® Product Monograph).
Saquinavir
Co-administration of saquinavir requires caution and monitoring, along with potential dose
reduction of saquinavir, due to increased saquinavir exposure and thus the risk of saquinavirrelated toxicities (see the INVIRASE® Product Monograph).
Concomitant administration of omeprazole (40 mg daily) with saquinavir/ritonavir (1000/100 mg
twice daily) increased saquinavir AUC by 82% and Cmax by 75%.
Drug-Food Interactions
DEXILANT® can be taken without regard to food or timing of food (see ACTION AND
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).
Drug-Herb Interactions
Interactions with herbal products have not been established.
Drug-Laboratory Interactions
During treatment with antisecretory drugs, Chromogranin A (CgA) increases due to decreased
gastric acidity. Increased CgA levels may interfere with investigations for neuroendocrine
tumours. To avoid this interference, DEXILANT® treatment should be stopped 14 days before
CgA measurements (See ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY / Pharmacodynamic
Properties).

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 13 of 38

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
Recommended Dose in Patients 12 Years of Age and Older and Dosage Adjustment
Indication
Healing of Erosive Esophagitis

a
b

Maintenance of Healed Erosive
Esophagitis
Symptomatic Non-Erosive
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
(GERD)

Recommended Dose
60 mg

Frequency
Once daily for up to 8 weeks

30 mg a

Once daily b

30 mg

Once daily for 4 weeks

In patients who had moderate or severe erosive esophagitis, a maintenance dose of 60 mg may be used.
Controlled studies did not extend beyond 6 months in adults, and beyond 4 months in adolescents 12 to 17 years of
age.

No dosage adjustment for DEXILANT® is necessary for patients with mild hepatic impairment
(Child-Pugh Class A). DEXILANT® 30 mg should be considered for patients with moderate
hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B). No studies have been conducted in patients with
severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C).
No dosage adjustment is necessary for elderly patients or for patients with renal impairment.
Patients should use the lowest dose and shortest duration of PPI therapy appropriate to the
condition being treated.
Missed Dose
If a capsule is missed at its usual time, it should be taken as soon as possible. But if it is too close
to the time of the next dose, only the prescribed dose should be taken at the appointed time. A
double dose should not be taken.
Administration
DEXILANT® can be taken without regard to food or the timing of food.
DEXILANT® should be swallowed whole with plenty of water.
• Alternatively, DEXILANT® capsules can be opened and administered as follows:
• Administration with Applesauce
1. Place one tablespoon of applesauce into a clean container
2. Open capsule
3. Sprinkle intact granules on applesauce;
4. Swallow applesauce and granules immediately. Do not chew granules. Do not save the
applesauce and granules for later use.
• Administration with Water in an Oral Syringe
1. Open the capsule and empty the granules into a clean container with 20 mL of water.
2. Withdraw the entire mixture into a syringe.
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 14 of 38

3. Gently swirl the syringe in order to keep granules from settling.
4. Administer the mixture immediately into the mouth. Do not save the water and granule
mixture for later use.
5. Refill the syringe with 10 mL of water, swirl gently, and administer.
6. Repeat step 5.
• Administration with Water via a Nasogastric Tube (≥16 French)
1. Open the capsule and empty the granules into a clean container with 20 mL of water.
2. Withdraw the entire mixture into a catheter-tip syringe.
3. Swirl the syringe gently in order to keep the granules from settling, and immediately
inject the mixture through the nasogastric tube into the stomach. Do not save the water
and granule mixture for later use.
4. Refill the syringe with 10 mL of water, swirl gently, and flush the tube.
5. Repeat step 4.
OVERDOSAGE
There have been no reports of significant overdose of DEXILANT®. Dexlansoprazole is not
expected to be removed from the circulation by hemodialysis.
For management of a suspected drug overdose, contact your regional Poison Control
Centre.
ACTION AND CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Mechanism of Action
DEXILANT® is a PPI that suppresses gastric acid secretion by specific inhibition of the (H+, K+)ATPase in the gastric parietal cell. By acting specifically on the proton pump, DEXILANT®
blocks the final step of acid production.
Pharmacodynamics
Antisecretory Activity
The effects of DEXILANT® 60 mg (n = 20) or lansoprazole 30 mg (n = 23) once daily for five
days on 24-hour intragastric pH were assessed in healthy subjects in a multiple-dose crossover
study.2 The results are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3: Effect on 24-Hour Intragastric pH on Day 5 After
Administration of DEXILANT® or Lansoprazole
DEXILANT®
Lansoprazole
60 mg
30 mg
Mean Intragastric pH
4.55*
4.13
% Time Intragastric pH > 4
(hours)
71*
60
(17 hours)
(14 hours)
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 15 of 38

* p value <0.05 versus lansoprazole.

Pharmacodynamic Properties
During treatment with antisecretory medicinal products, serum gastrin increases in response to
the decreased acid secretion. Also CgA increases due to decreased gastric acidity. The increased
CgA levels may interfere with investigations for neuroendocrine tumours.
Available published evidence suggests that proton pump inhibitors should be discontinued 14
days prior to CgA measurements. This is to allow CgA levels that might be spuriously elevated
following PPI treatment to return to reference range (See WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS –
Interference with Laboratory Tests).
Pharmacokinetics
The formulation of DEXILANT® utilizing Dual Delayed Release technology results in a
dexlansoprazole plasma concentration-time profile with two distinct peaks; the first peak occurs 1
to 2 hours after administration, followed by a second peak within 4 to 5 hours (see Figure 1).2,3
Figure 1: Mean Plasma Dexlansoprazole Concentration – Time Profile Following Oral
Administration of 60 mg DEXILANT® or 30 mg Lansoprazole Once Daily for
5 Days in Healthy Adult Subjects
1200

Plasma Concentration (ng/mL)

DEXILANT 60 mg
Lansoprazole 30 mg
1000

800

600

400

200

0
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

Time (h)

Dexlansoprazole is eliminated with a half-life of approximately 1 to 2 hours in healthy subjects
(see Table 4) and in patients with symptomatic GERD. No accumulation of dexlansoprazole
occurs after multiple, once daily doses of DEXILANT® 30 mg or 60 mg.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 16 of 38

a

Table 4: Mean (CV %) Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Healthy
Adult Subjects on Day 5 After Administration of DEXILANT®
Dose
Cmax
AUC24
t1/2a
CL/F
Vz/F
(mg)
(ng/mL) (ng·h/mL)
(h)
(L/h)
30
658
3275
1.49
11.4
25.7
(40%)
(47%)
(N=43)
(48%)
(49%)
(N=44)
(N=43)
(N=43)
(N=43)
60
1397
6529
1.54
11.6
33.8
(51%)
(60%)
(N=73)
(46%)
(89%)
(N=79)
(N=73)
(N=41)
(N=41)
Harmonic mean

Absorption:
After oral administration of DEXILANT® 30 mg or 60 mg to healthy subjects, mean Cmax and
AUC values of dexlansoprazole increased approximately dose proportionally (see Figure 2).
Figure 2:

Mean Plasma Dexlansoprazole Concentration – Time Profile Following Oral
Administration of DEXILANT® on Day 5 in Healthy Adult Subjects

Plasma Concentration (ng/mL)

1200

DEXILANT 30 mg
DEXILANT 60 mg

1000

800

600

400

200

0

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

Time (h)

Distribution:
Plasma protein binding of dexlansoprazole ranged from 96.1% to 98.8% in healthy subjects and
was independent of concentration from 0.01 to 20 mcg/mL. The apparent volume of distribution
(Vz/F) after multiple doses in symptomatic GERD patients was 40.3 L.
Metabolism:
Dexlansoprazole is extensively metabolized in the liver by oxidation, reduction, and subsequent
formation of sulfate, glucuronide and glutathione conjugates to inactive metabolites. Oxidative
metabolites are formed by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme system including hydroxylation
mainly by CYP2C19, and oxidation to the sulfone by CYP3A4.
CYP2C19 is a polymorphic liver enzyme which exhibits three phenotypes in the metabolism of
CYP2C19 substrates; extensive metabolizers (*1/*1), intermediate metabolizers (*1/mutant) and
poor metabolizers (mutant/mutant). Systemic exposure of dexlansoprazole is generally higher in
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 17 of 38

intermediate and poor metabolizers. Dexlansoprazole is the major circulating component in
plasma4, regardless of CYP2C19 metabolizer status. In CYP2C19 intermediate and extensive
metabolizers, the major plasma metabolites are 5-hydroxy dexlansoprazole and its glucuronide
conjugate, while in CYP2C19 poor metabolizers dexlansoprazole sulfone is the major plasma
metabolite.
Excretion:
Following the administration of DEXILANT®, no unchanged dexlansoprazole is excreted in
urine. Following the administration of [14C]dexlansoprazole to 6 healthy male subjects,
approximately 50.7% (standard deviation (SD): 9.0%) of the administered radioactivity was
excreted in urine and 47.6% (SD: 7.3%) in the feces. Apparent clearance (CL/F) in healthy
subjects was 11.4 to 11.6 L/h, respectively, after 5-days of 30 or 60 mg once daily administration.
Effect of Food:
DEXILANT® can be taken without regard to food or the timing of food. In food-effect studies in
healthy subjects receiving DEXILANT®, increases in Cmax ranged from 12% to 55% and
increases in AUC ranged from 9% to 37% under various fed conditions compared to fasting.
However, no relevant differences with regard to intragastric pH were observed.5 An additional
study showed that administration of 60 mg DEXILANT® prior to consumption of breakfast,
lunch, dinner or an evening snack did not have an effect on dexlansoprazole exposure, or a
clinically relevant effect on 24-hour intragastric pH control.6
Special Populations and Conditions
Pediatrics:
In a study of 36 adolescents 12 to 17 years old with symptomatic GERD, dexlansoprazole
pharmacokinetics (See Figure 3 and Table 5) were similar to those observed in healthy adults
(See Figure 2 and Table 4).12 In adolescents, dexlansoprazole mean Cmax was 81% to 105% of the
adult mean Cmax value, mean AUC was 78% to 88% of the adult mean AUC value, and mean CL/F
was 112% to 132% of the adult mean CL/F value.
Table 5: Mean (CV %) Pharmacokinetic Parameters in Adolescents 12
to 17 Years of Age with Symptomatic GERD on Day 7 After
Administration of DEXILANT® once daily for 7 days
Dose
(mg)
30
(N=17)
60
(N=18)

Cmax
(ng/mL)
691
(53%)
1136
(51%)

AUCτ
(ng·h/mL)
2886
(47%)
5120
(58%)

CL/F
(L/h)
12.8
(48%)
15.3
(49%)

Note: area under the concentration-time curve during a dosing interval (AUCτ)

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 18 of 38

Figure 3:

Mean Dexlansoprazole Plasma Concentration – Time Profile Following
Administration of 30 or 60 mg DEXILANT® Capsules Once Daily for 7 Days in
Adolescents 12 to 17 Years of Age with Symptomatic GERD

The pharmacokinetics of dexlansoprazole in patients under the age of 12 years have not been
studied.
Geriatrics:
In a study of 12 male and 12 female healthy subjects who received a single oral dose of
DEXILANT® 60 mg, the terminal elimination half-life of dexlansoprazole was statistically
significantly longer in geriatric subjects compared to younger subjects (2.23 and 1.5 hours,
respectively). In addition, dexlansoprazole exhibited higher systemic exposure (AUC) in
geriatric subjects (34.5% higher) than younger subjects. These differences were not clinically
relevant. No dosage adjustment is necessary in geriatric patients (see WARNINGS AND
PRECAUTIONS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
Gender:
In a study of 12 male and 12 female healthy subjects who received a single oral dose of
DEXILANT® 60 mg, females had higher systemic exposure (AUC) (42.8% higher) than males.
No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients based on gender.
Hepatic Insufficiency:
In a study of 12 patients with moderately impaired hepatic function who received a single oral
dose of DEXILANT® 60 mg, plasma exposure (AUC) of bound and unbound dexlansoprazole in
the hepatic impairment group was approximately 2 times greater compared to subjects with
normal hepatic function. This difference in exposure was not due to a difference in protein
binding between the two liver function groups. No adjustment for DEXILANT® is necessary for
patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A). DEXILANT® 30 mg should be
considered for patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B). No studies have
been conducted in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) (see
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS).
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 19 of 38

Renal Insufficiency:
Dexlansoprazole is extensively metabolized in the liver to inactive metabolites, and no parent
drug is recovered in the urine following an oral dose of dexlansoprazole. Therefore, the
pharmacokinetics of dexlansoprazole are not expected to be altered in patients with renal
impairment, and no studies were conducted in subjects with renal impairment (see WARNINGS
AND PRECAUTIONS).
STORAGE AND STABILITY
Store at room temperature (15° to 30°C).
DOSAGE FORMS, COMPOSITION AND PACKAGING
DEXILANT® is supplied as a dual delayed release formulation in capsules for oral administration
using Dual Delayed Release technology. The capsules contain dexlansoprazole in a mixture of two
types of enteric-coated granules with different pH-dependent dissolution profiles. One type of granule
is designed to release dexlansoprazole after the granules reach the proximal small intestine; the second
type of granule is designed to release dexlansoprazole in the distal region of the small intestine,
generally several hours later.
DEXILANT® is available in two dosage strengths: 30 mg and 60 mg, per capsule. Each capsule
contains enteric-coated granules consisting of dexlansoprazole and the following non-medicinal
ingredients: colloidal silicon dioxide, hydroxypropyl cellulose, hypromellose 2910, lowsubstituted hydroxypropyl cellulose, magnesium carbonate, methacrylic acid copolymer,
polyethylene glycol 8000, polysorbate 80, sucrose, sugar spheres, talc, titanium dioxide, and
triethyl citrate.
The components of the capsule shell include the following non-medicinal ingredients:
carrageenan, hypromellose and potassium chloride. Based on the capsule shell color, blue
contains FD&C Blue No. 2 aluminum lake; gray contains black ferric oxide; and both contain
titanium dioxide.
DEXILANT® is provided in high-density polyethylene (HDPE) bottles in 90 count
configurations. Each 30 mg capsule is opaque, blue and gray with TAP and “30” imprinted on
the capsule and each 60 mg capsule is opaque, blue with TAP and “60” imprinted on the capsule.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 20 of 38

PART II: SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION
PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION
Drug Substance
Common name:

Dexlansoprazole

Chemical name:

(+)-2-[(R)-{[3-methyl-4-(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)pyridin-2-yl]
methyl} sulfinyl]-1H-benzimidazole

Molecular formula
and molecular mass: C16H14F3N3O2S

369.36

Structural formula:
O

H
N

N

S
N

O

CF3

CH3

Physicochemical properties:
Dexlansoprazole is a white to nearly white crystalline powder which melts with
decomposition at 140°C. Dexlansoprazole is the R-enantiomer of lansoprazole (a
racemic mixture of the R- and S-enantiomers).
Dexlansoprazole is freely soluble in dimethylformamide, methanol,
dichloromethane, ethanol, and ethyl acetate; and soluble in acetonitrile; slightly
soluble in ether; and very slightly soluble in water; and practically insoluble in
hexane.
Dexlansoprazole is stable when exposed to light. Dexlansoprazole is more stable
in neutral and alkaline conditions than acidic conditions.
CLINICAL TRIALS
Studies in Adult Patients
Healing of Erosive Esophagitis
Two multi-center, double-blind, active-controlled, randomized, 8-week studies were conducted in
patients with endoscopically confirmed erosive esophagitis.7 Severity of the disease was
classified based on the Los Angeles Classification Grading System (Grades A-D). Patients were
randomized to one of the following three treatment groups: DEXILANT® 60 mg daily,
DEXILANT® 90 mg daily or lansoprazole 30 mg daily. A total of 4092 patients were enrolled
and ranged in age from 18 to 90 years (median age 48 years) with 54% male. Race was
distributed as follows: 87% Caucasian, 5% Black and 8% other. Based on the Los Angeles
Classification, 71% of patients had Grades A and B erosive esophagitis (mild) and 29% of
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 21 of 38

patients had Grades C and D erosive esophagitis (moderate to severe) before treatment.
By the life-table method of analysis DEXILANT® 60 mg healed 92.3% to 93.1% of patients
versus 86.1% to 91.5% for lansoprazole 30 mg after 8 weeks of treatment. Non-inferiority was
demonstrated in both studies. Statistical superiority was not established using log-rank tests.
The crude rate estimates considered patients who did not have endoscopically documented healed
erosive esophagitis and who discontinued prematurely as not healed. Based on crude rate
estimates, healing rates at Week 4 (secondary) or Week 8 (primary) were higher for
DEXILANT® than lansoprazole (Table 6). Treatment with DEXILANT® 60 mg was non-inferior
to lansoprazole 30 mg at Week 8 in both studies. Statistical superiority of DEXILANT® 60 mg
over lansoprazole 30 mg was established in the first study but was not replicated in the second
study.
Table 6: Erosive Esophagitis Healing Rates in Adults – All Grades
Study Number Treatment Group Week 4
of
(Daily)
%
Patients
Healed
(N)
1
639
DEXILANT® 60
66.2
mg
656
Lansoprazole 30 mg
64.8
®
2
657
DEXILANT 60
69.7
mg
648
Lansoprazole 30 mg
65.4

Week 8
%
Healeda

CI = Confidence interval
a
Primary efficacy endpoint by the crude rate method of analysis
b
Demonstrated non-inferiority to lansoprazole
*Statistically significant

85.3
79.0
86.9

(95% CI) for the
p-value
Treatment Difference
Week 8
(DEXILANT® –
Lansoprazole) at Week 8
(2.17, 10.48)b
0.004*
(-1.45, 6.14)b

0.234

84.6

The life-table healing rates at Week 8 for patients with moderate to severe erosive esophagitis
were 88.9% and 74.5% for DEXILANT® 60 mg and lansoprazole 30 mg, respectively, in the first
study. The difference was statistically significant (p=0.011). In the second study, the Week 8
life-table healing rates were 87.6% and 87.7% for DEXILANT® 60 mg and lansoprazole 30 mg,
respectively, and were not statistically significantly different.
The crude healing rates at Week 8 for patients with moderate to severe erosive esophagitis are
presented in Table 7.
Table 7: Healing Rates at Week 8 – Moderate to Severe Erosive Esophagitis in Adults
Study
Number of
Treatment Group
Week 8
p-value
Patients (N)
(Daily)
% Healeda
1
182
DEXILANT® 60 mg
79.7
0.002*
200
Lansoprazole 30 mg
65.0
2
194
DEXILANT® 60 mg
77.8
0.768
190
Lansoprazole 30 mg
78.9
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 22 of 38

Healing rates are by the crude rate method of analysis
* Statistically significant
a

DEXILANT® 90 mg was studied and did not provide additional clinical benefit over
DEXILANT® 60 mg.
Maintenance of Healed Erosive Esophagitis
A multi-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study was conducted in patients
who successfully completed a erosive esophagitis study and showed endoscopically confirmed
healed erosive esophagitis.8 Maintenance of healing and symptom relief over a six-month period
were evaluated with DEXILANT® 30 mg or 60 mg once daily compared to placebo. A total of
445 patients were enrolled and ranged in age from 18 to 85 years (median age 49 years), with
52% female. Race was distributed as follows: 90% Caucasian, 5% Black and 5% other.
By the life-table method, DEXILANT® 30 mg and 60 mg demonstrated statistically significantly
higher rates of maintenance of healed erosive esophagitis (74.9% and 82.5%, respectively) than
placebo (27.2%) at Month 6 (p<0.00001).
Based on crude rate estimates, 66.4% percent of patients treated with 30 mg or 60 mg of
DEXILANT® remained healed over the six-month time period versus 14.3% of placebo patients
(p<0.00001) (Table 8).
Table 8: Maintenance Ratesa of Healed EE in Adults at Month 6

a

Number of
Patients
(N)b
125
119

Treatment Group
(daily)
DEXILANT® 30 mg
Placebo

Maintenance Rate
(%)
66.4*
14.3

Based on crude rate estimates, patients who did not have endoscopically documented relapse
and prematurely discontinued were considered to have relapsed.
b
Patients with at least one post baseline endoscopy
*
Statistically significant vs. placebo

For patients with more severe grades of erosive esophagitis (Grades C or D) before healing,
DEXILANT® 30 mg and 60 mg also achieved statistically significantly higher 6-month
maintenance rates than placebo by the life-table method. For the crude rate analysis, the trends in
the results were similar to the life-table analysis.
DEXILANT® 30 mg and 60 mg achieved statistically significantly (p<0.00001) greater
percentages of 24-hour heartburn-free periods, and heartburn free nights during the study
treatment period, compared to placebo (see Tables 9 and 10).
Table 9: Median Percentage of 24-Hour Heartburn-Free Periods of the Maintenance of
Healed EE Study in Adults
Treatment Group (daily)
N
Heartburn-Free 24-hour Periods (Median %)
DEXILANT® 30 mg
132
96.1*
DEXILANT® 60 mg
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

147

90.9*
Page 23 of 38

*

Placebo

141

statistically significant vs. placebo (p<0.00001)

28.6

Table 10: Median Percentage of Nighttime Heartburn-Free Periods of the Maintenance of
Healed EE Study in Adults
Treatment Group (daily)
N
Heartburn-Free Nights (Median %)
®
DEXILANT 30 mg
132
98.9*

*

DEXILANT® 60 mg
Placebo

147
140

statistically significant vs. placebo (p<0.00001)

96.2*
71.7

In a second study (N=451) of DEXILANT® 60 mg and 90 mg versus placebo, DEXILANT® 60
mg showed similar results to the first study in the maintenance of healed erosive esophagitis and
heartburn relief. DEXILANT® 90 mg did not provide additional clinical benefit over
DEXILANT® 60 mg.
Symptomatic GERD
A multi-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, 4-week study was conducted in
patients with a diagnosis of symptomatic GERD made primarily by presentation of symptoms.9
These patients who identified heartburn as their primary symptom, had a history of heartburn for
6 months or longer, had heartburn on at least 4 of 7 days immediately prior to randomization and
had no esophageal erosions as confirmed by endoscopy. However, patients with symptoms
which were not acid-related may not have been excluded using these inclusion criteria. Patients
were randomized to one of the following treatment groups: DEXILANT® 30 mg daily, 60 mg
daily, or placebo. A total of 947 patients were enrolled and ranged in age from 18 to 86 years
(median age 48 years) with 71% female. Race was distributed as follows: 82% Caucasian, 14%
Black and 4% other.
DEXILANT® 30 mg provided statistically significantly greater percent of days with heartburnfree 24-hour periods and percent of nights without heartburn over placebo as assessed by daily
diary over 4 weeks (Table 11). DEXILANT® 60 mg was studied and provided no additional
clinical benefit over DEXILANT® 30 mg.
Table 11: Median Percentages of Heartburn Relief During the 4 Week
Treatment Period of the Symptomatic GERD Study in Adults
Heartburn-Free
Nights without
N
Treatment Group
24-Hour Periods
Heartburn
(daily)
(%)
(%)
312
DEXILANT® 30
54.9*
80.8*
mg
310
Placebo
18.5
51.7

* Statistically significant vs. placebo, p<0.00001

A higher percentage of patients on DEXILANT® 30 mg had heartburn-free 24-hour periods
compared to placebo through 4 weeks of treatment.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 24 of 38

Studies in Pediatric Patients
Healing of EE, Maintenance of Healed EE and Relief of Heartburn: Adolescents 12 to 17
Years of Age
In a multi-center, 24-week study, 62 adolescents 12 to 17 years of age with a documented history
of GERD for at least 3 months and endoscopically-proven EE were treated with dexlansoprazole
60 mg capsule once daily, for 8 weeks (single-arm open-label healing phase), followed by a 16week maintenance phase (randomized double-blind placebo-controlled).13 The median age was
15 years with males accounting for 61% of the patients. Based on the Los Angeles Classification
Grading Scale, 96.8% of the EE patients had mild EE (Grades A and B), and 3.2% of patients had
moderate to severe EE (Grades C and D) before treatment. Among the 62 patients enrolled in the
healing phase, 58 patients completed the 8-week treatment, with 51 (82.3% out of 62) patients
achieving EE healing by week 8. This corresponds to 87.9% of the 58 patients who completed the
8-week treatment.
After the initial 8 weeks of treatment, 51 patients with endoscopically confirmed healed EE were
randomized to receive dexlansoprazole 30 mg capsule or placebo once daily for an additional 16
weeks, in order to assess the maintenance of EE healing. A total of 38 patients completed the
maintenance phase. Eighty-two percent (81.8%) of patients treated with dexlansoprazole 30 mg
capsule remained healed over the four-month treatment period as confirmed by endoscopy. The
rate was 58.3% in patients treated with placebo (see Table 12).
Table 12: Maintenance of Healed EE After 16 weeks in Adolescents 12 to
17 Years of Age
N
Treatment Group (daily)
Maintenance Rate (%)
®
22
DEXILANT 30 mg
81.8
24
Placebo
58.3
During the 16-week maintenance period, median percentage of 24-hour heartburn-free periods
were 86.6% for those receiving dexlansoprazole 30 mg capsule compared to 68.1% for those
receiving placebo.
Symptomatic Non-Erosive GERD: Adolescents 12 to 17 Years of Age
In a single-arm uncontrolled, open-label, multi-center study, 104 adolescents 12 to 17 years of
age with symptomatic non-erosive GERD were treated with dexlansoprazole 30 mg capsule once
daily, for 4 weeks.14 Patients had a documented history of GERD symptoms for at least 3 months
prior to screening, reported heartburn on at least three out of seven days during screening, and no
esophageal erosions as confirmed by endoscopy. Patients ranged in age from 12 to 17 years
(median age 15 years) with females accounting for 70% of the patients. During the 4-week
treatment period, the median percentage of 24-hour heartburn free periods was 47.3%.
Overall, the efficacy results for healing of EE, maintenance of healed EE, and symptomatic nonerosive GERD in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age as enrolled in the studies did not appear to be
substantially different from those reported in adults.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 25 of 38

DETAILED PHARMACOLOGY
Animal Pharmacology
Pharmacodynamics
Gastric Acid Secretion Effects in Rats and Dogs
Five studies compared the effect of dexlansoprazole on basal and stimulated gastric acid secretion
in pylorus-ligated Sprague-Dawley (SD) male rats with those of lansoprazole. In all five studies,
dexlansoprazole was more potent than lansoprazole in the suppression of gastric acid secretion.
In studies of basal secretion, histamine 2HCl-, bethanechol chloride-, pentagastrin- and
2-deoxy-D-glucose-stimulated secretion, lansoprazole demonstrated potency values which were
63, 50, 83, 31 and 63%, respectively, of those seen with dexlansoprazole.
One study compared the effect of dexlansoprazole on histamine-stimulated gastric acid secretion
in Heidenhain pouch male dogs with those of lansoprazole. Lansoprazole was less potent and
demonstrated a potency value which was 45% of that seen with dexlansoprazole.
Effects on Alimentary Tract Injury in Rats
Three studies compared the effect of dexlansoprazole on the formation of alimentary tract injury
in male SD rats with those of lansoprazole. In all three studies, dexlansoprazole was more potent
than lansoprazole in suppression of lesion formation. In studies examining indomethacininduced gastric mucosal lesions, mepirizole-induced duodenal mucosal lesions and reflux
esophagitis, lansoprazole demonstrated potency values which were 30, 29 and 37%, respectively,
of those seen with dexlansoprazole.
Pharmacokinetics
An in situ experiment was performed using surgically modified rats to explore the
gastrointestinal sites of dexlansoprazole absorption. Five segments of the digestive tract (the
stomach, the upper, middle and lower small intestine, and the large intestine) were isolated by
ligation, and [14C]dexlansoprazole was directly injected into the isolated segments. Blood
samples were collected post-dose, and total radioactivity in the plasma was determined.
Resulting plasma total radioactivity concentration-time curves were similar across all segments of
the intestine, indicating similar absorption from each of the segments. In contrast, plasma total
radioactivity concentrations in rats given an intragastric injection of [14C]dexlansoprazole were
very low. Together these results suggest that oral doses of dexlansoprazole were well absorbed
from the small and large intestine of the rat, whereas relatively little was absorbed from the
stomach.
Following the administration of [14C]dexlansoprazole to pigmented (Long Evans) and
non-pigmented (Sprague-Dawley) rats, [14C]dexlansoprazole derived radioactivity was widely
and rapidly distributed to most tissues and organs. Maximum concentrations of
[14C]dexlansoprazole derived radioactivity were obtained within 0.5 hour after dosing in nearly
all tissues tested. In non-pigmented rats, the highest [14C]dexlansoprazole derived radioactivity
concentrations were found in the stomach, liver, intestine, thyroid and kidney. Total radioactivity
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 26 of 38

concentrations in all other tissues tested were generally similar to or less than those in plasma at
the same time point. By 24 hours post dose, total radioactivity levels decreased to low levels in
all tissues of the non–pigmented rats, with the exception of the thyroid which remained relatively
high. In pigmented rats, radioactivity was generally preferentially distributed into organs of
elimination. The tissues showing the highest concentrations of radioactivity, excluding the
gastrointestinal tract, were liver, thyroid, renal cortex, urinary bladder, kidney, renal medulla, and
uveal tract. Lingering radioactivity concentrations in the uveal tract suggests that
[14C]dexlansoprazole derived radioactivity binds to melanin.
Dexlansoprazole was metabolized to its inactive metabolites via oxidation, reduction, and
subsequent formation of sulfate, glucuronide and glutathione conjugates. Dexlansoprazole was
extensively metabolized by both rats and dogs, but some differences in metabolic patterns were
observed between the species, most notably in the plasma and urine. Dexlansoprazole was a
major component in both rat and dog plasma metabolic profiles at early time points. 5Sulfonyloxy dexlansoprazole sulfide was a major component in the plasma of both male and
female rats, as well as 4-glucuronyloxy dexlansoprazole sulfide in the male rats. In dog plasma,
dexlansoprazole sulfone, 5-glucuronyloxy dexlansoprazole and 5-glucuronyloxy dexlansoprazole
sulfone were the major metabolites. Glutathione-derived conjugates were the major metabolites
in rat urine, whereas dexlansoprazole derived glucuronides and sulfates were the major
metabolites in dog urine. 5-Hydroxy dexlansoprazole sulfide (M-IV) was the major component
in fecal metabolic profiles, and dexlansoprazole derived glucuronides and sulfates accounted for
the majority of the radioactive peaks in the biliary metabolic profiles from both rats and dogs.
Following administration of a [14C]dexlansoprazole dose, fecal excretion was the main route of
elimination in rats and dogs. Approximately 69% to 81% and 53% to 83% of the administered
radioactive dose was recovered in the feces of rats and dogs, respectively. Biliary excretion of
total radioactivity following oral administration of [14C]dexlansoprazole to male and female bile
duct cannulated rats and dogs averaged approximately 51% and 45 to 63% of the administered
dose, respectively, within 96 hours post-dose. Dexlansoprazole derived glucuronides and sulfates
accounted for the majority of the radioactivity excreted into the bile of both rats and dogs.
Urinary recovery of [14C]dexlansoprazole derived radioactivity ranged from approximately 15%
to 25% in rats, and 13% to 30% in dogs. Glutathione-derived conjugates were the major
metabolites in rat urine, whereas dexlansoprazole derived glucuronides and sulfates were the
major metabolites in dog urine. No unchanged parent drug was measurable in the urine, feces or
bile of rats or dogs.
Human Pharmacology
Serum Gastrin Effects
The effect of DEXILANT® on serum gastrin concentrations was evaluated in approximately 3460
patients in clinical trials up to 8 weeks and in 1025 patients for up to 6 to 12 months. The mean
fasting gastrin concentrations increased from baseline during treatment with DEXILANT® 30 mg
and 60 mg doses. In general, in patients treated for more than 6 months, mean serum gastrin
levels increased during approximately the first 3 months of treatment and were stable for the
remainder of treatment. Mean serum gastrin levels returned to pre-treatment levels within one
month of discontinuation of treatment.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 27 of 38

Enterochromaffin-Like Cell (ECL) Effects
There were no reports of ECL cell hyperplasia in gastric biopsy specimens obtained from 857
patients treated with DEXILANT® 30 mg, 60 mg or 90 mg for up to 12 months. See
TOXICOLOGY, Carcinogenicity.
Effect on Cardiac Repolarization
A study was conducted to assess the potential of DEXILANT® to prolong the QT/QTc interval in
healthy adult subjects.10 DEXILANT® doses of 90 mg or 300 mg did not delay cardiac
repolarization compared to placebo. The positive control (moxifloxacin) produced statistically
significantly greater mean maximum and time-averaged QT/QTc intervals compared to placebo.
Effect of Co-administration with Clopidogrel
Clopidogrel is metabolized to its active metabolite in part by CYP2C19. A study of healthy
subjects who were CYP2C19 extensive metabolizers, receiving once daily administration of
clopidogrel 75 mg alone or concomitantly with DEXILANT® 60 mg (n=40), for 9 days was
conducted. The mean AUC of the active metabolite of clopidogrel was reduced by approximately
9% (mean AUC ratio was 91%, with 90% CI of 86-97%) when DEXILANT® was
coadministered compared to administration of clopidogrel alone.
Pharmacodynamic parameters were also measured and demonstrated that the change in inhibition
of platelet aggregation (induced by 5 mcM ADP) was related to the change in the exposure to
clopidogrel active metabolite. The clinical significance of this finding is not clear.
TOXICOLOGY
Multi-dose Studies
A thirteen-week oral toxicity study was conducted in Wistar rats. Animals were administered 5,
15 or 50 mg/kg/day of dexlansoprazole or 50 mg/kg/day of lansoprazole. Pharmacologically
related increases in stomach weight were observed for all doses of dexlansoprazole and
lansoprazole. The only histological findings attributed to test article treatment were eosinophilia
of chief cells in the stomach at 15 and 50 mg/kg/day of dexlansoprazole and 50 mg/kg/day of
lansoprazole, and slight centrilobular hepatocyte hypertrophy in the liver at 50 mg/kg/day of
dexlansoprazole and lansoprazole.
In a thirteen-week oral toxicity study in dogs, animals were administered 5, 15 or 50 mg/kg/day
of dexlansoprazole or 50 mg/kg/day of lansoprazole. Systemic exposure to dexlansoprazole
generally was higher in animals dosed with dexlansoprazole at 50 mg/kg/day than with the same
dosage of lansoprazole. The effects of dexlansoprazole and lansoprazole administered at 50
mg/kg/day were essentially the same. Pharmacologically related increases in stomach weight
were observed at 15 and 50 mg/kg/day dexlansoprazole and lansoprazole 50 mg/kg/day. The
only histological findings attributed to test article treatment were parietal cell vacuolation and/or
single cell necrosis and slight accumulation of bile in hepatocellular canaliculi.
The no-observed-adverse-effect-level (NOAEL) of dexlansoprazole was 15 mg/kg/day in rats and
5 mg/kg/day in dogs.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 28 of 38

Carcinogenicity
Lansoprazole is a racemic mixture of R- and S-enantiomers. Following administration of
lansoprazole in humans and animals, the major component circulating in plasma is
dexlansoprazole, the R-enantiomer of lansoprazole.4 Therefore, the carcinogenic potential of
dexlansoprazole was assessed using existing lansoprazole studies. In two 24-month
carcinogenicity studies, Sprague-Dawley rats were treated orally with lansoprazole at doses of 5
to 150 mg/kg/day, about 1 to 40 times the exposure on a body surface (mg/m2) basis of a 50 kg
person of average height (1.46 m2 BSA) given the recommended human dose of lansoprazole of
30 mg/day (22.2 mg/m2). Lansoprazole produced dose-related gastric ECL cell hyperplasia and
ECL cell carcinoids in both male and female rats (see DETAILED PHARMACOLOGY, Human
Pharmacology).
In rats, lansoprazole also increased the incidence of intestinal metaplasia of the gastric epithelium
in both sexes. In male rats, lansoprazole produced a dose-related increase of testicular interstitial
cell adenomas. The incidence of these adenomas in rats receiving doses of 15 to 150 mg/kg/day
(4 to 40 times the recommended lansoprazole human dose based on BSA) exceeded the low
background incidence (range = 1.4 to 10%) for this strain of rat. Testicular interstitial cell
adenoma also occurred in 1 of 30 rats treated with 50 mg lansoprazole/kg/day (13 times the
recommended lansoprazole human dose based on BSA) in a 1-year toxicity study.
In a 24-month carcinogenicity study, CD-1 mice were treated orally with lansoprazole doses of
15 mg to 600 mg/kg/day, 2 to 80 times the recommended human dose based on BSA.
Lansoprazole produced a dose-related increased incidence of gastric ECL cell hyperplasia.
Lansoprazole also induced a low, non-dose-related incidence of carcinoid tumors in the gastric
mucosa in several dose groups (one female mouse in the 15 mg/kg/day group, one male mouse in
the 150 mg/kg/day group, and 2 males and 1 female in the 300 mg/kg/day group). It also
produced an increased incidence of liver tumors (hepatocellular adenoma plus carcinoma). The
tumor incidences in male mice treated with 300 mg and 600 mg lansoprazole/kg/day (40 to 80
times the recommended lansoprazole human dose based on BSA) and female mice treated with
150 mg to 600 mg lansoprazole/kg/day (20 to 80 times the recommended human dose based on
BSA) exceeded the ranges of background incidences in historical controls for this strain of mice.
Lansoprazole treatment produced adenoma of rete testis in male mice receiving 75 to 600
mg/kg/day (10 to 80 times the recommended lansoprazole human dose based on BSA).
Mutagenicity
Dexlansoprazole was positive in the Ames test. In an in vitro chromosome aberration test using
Chinese hamster lung cells, dexlansoprazole was judged positive (equivocal) because the
percentage of affected cells increased slightly but did not reach the pre-set criteria for a positive
response. Dexlansoprazole was negative in the in vivo mouse micronucleus test.
Reproduction and Teratology
An embryo-fetal toxicity study conducted in pregnant rabbits at oral dexlansoprazole doses up to
30 mg/kg/day (approximately 9-fold the maximum recommended human dexlansoprazole dose
[60 mg] based on BSA) showed that exposure increased with dosage, and there were no
substantive differences in the toxic effects of dexlansoprazole and lansoprazole. Dams treated
with both test articles experienced transient effects on food consumption, body weights and fecal
volume. No adverse effects on reproductive parameters nor test article-related fetal abnormalities
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 29 of 38

occurred with either test article. The incidence of unossified talus was increased at 30 mg/kg/day
of dexlansoprazole and lansoprazole. The dexlansoprazole NOAEL for general toxicity in the
dams was 3 mg/ kg/day. For reproductive toxicity, the NOAEL was greater than or equal to 30
mg/kg/day. For embryo-fetal development, the NOAEL was 10 mg/kg.
Reproduction studies performed in pregnant rats with oral lansoprazole at doses up to 150
mg/kg/day (40 times the recommended human dose based on BSA) and in pregnant rabbits at
oral lansoprazole doses up to 30 mg/kg/day (16 times the recommended human dose based on
BSA) revealed no evidence of impaired fertility or harm to the fetus due to lansoprazole.
Juvenile Animal Toxicity Data
In a juvenile rat study, adverse effects on bone growth and development and heart valves were
observed at lansoprazole doses higher than the maximum recommended equivalent human dose.
An eight-week oral toxicity study with a four-week recovery phase was conducted in juvenile rats
with lansoprazole administered from postnatal Day 7 (age equivalent to neonatal humans)
through 62 (age equivalent to approximately 14 years in humans) at doses of 40 to 500
mg/kg/day.
Heart valve thickening occurred at a lansoprazole dose of 500 mg/kg/day (approximately three to
five times the expected dexlansoprazole exposure based on AUC in pediatric patients less than 12
years of age). Heart valve thickening was not observed at the next lower dose (250 mg/kg/day)
and below. The findings trended towards reversibility after a four-week drug-free recovery
period.
No effects on heart valves were observed in a 13-week intravenous toxicity study of lansoprazole
in adolescent rats (approximately 12 years human age equivalence) at systemic exposures similar
to those achieved in the eight-week oral toxicity study in juvenile (neonatal) rats.
In the eight-week oral toxicity study of lansoprazole, doses equal to or greater than 100
mg/kg/day produced delayed growth, with impairment of weight gain observed as early as
postnatal Day 10 (age equivalent to neonatal humans). At the end of treatment, the signs of
impaired growth at 100 mg/kg/day and higher included reductions in body weight (14% to 44%
compared to controls), absolute weight of multiple organs, femur weight, femur length and
crown-rump length. Femoral growth plate thickness was reduced only in males and only at the
500 mg/kg/day dose. The effects related to delayed growth persisted through the end of the 4week recovery period. Longer term data were not collected.
In a follow-up developmental toxicity study, juvenile rats (12 rats per dose group) were orally
administered with 250 and/or 500 mg/kg/day lansoprazole for four or eight weeks starting on
postnatal Day (PND) 7 (age equivalent to neonatal humans), PND 14 (age equivalent to
approximately one year in humans), or PND 21 (age equivalent to approximately two years in
humans).
Signs of toxicity (lower mean body weight gain and heart valve thickening) were observed in
almost all dose groups of juvenile rats. Incidences of heart valve thickening were 2/12, 5/12 and
0/12, respectively, in juvenile rats dosed starting at ages 7, 14, and 21 day with 500 mg/kg/day
lansoprazole for 4 weeks. Heart valve thickening in animals dosed with 500 mg/kg/days
lansoprazole for eight weeks starting at PND 7, 14, and 21 were 2/12, 7/12, and 1/12,
respectively.
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 30 of 38

Due to high incidence of mortality (9 of 24 males were found dead and 12 of 24 males were
euthanized between PND 18 and PND 21) in the 500 mg/kg/day dose group starting at PND 14,
dose level for this group was changed from 500 mg/kg/day to 250 mg/kg/day. Incidences of heart
valve thickening in juvenile rats dosed with 250 mg/kg/day (approximately two times the
expected dexlansoprazole exposure based on AUC in pediatric patients less than 12 years of age)
starting at PND 14 were two (2/12) and one (1/11) for four weeks and eight weeks exposures,
respectively. Incidences of the heart valve thickening were observed in almost all dose groups.
Juvenile rats younger than PND 21 (age equivalent to approximately two years in humans) were
more sensitive to the development of heart valve thickening.
The relevance of heart valve thickening in these studies to pediatric patients less than 12 years of
age is unknown. These findings are not relevant for patients 12 years of age and older.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 31 of 38

REFERENCES
1. Vakily M. Lee RD. Wu J. Gunawardhana L. Mulford D. Drug interaction studies with
dexlansoprazole modified release (TAK-390MR), a proton pump inhibitor with a dual
delayed-release formulation: results of four randomized, double-blind, crossover, placebocontrolled, single-centre studies. Clin Drug Invest. 2009; 29:35-50.
2. Vakily M. Zhang W. Wu J. Atkinson SN. Mulford D. Pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of a known active PPI with a novel Dual Delayed Release technology,
dexlansoprazole MR: a combined analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. Curr Med
Res Opin. 2009; 25:627-638.
3. Metz DC, Vakily M, Dixit T, Mulford D. Review article: dual delayed release formulation of
dexlansoprazole MR, a novel approach to overcome the limitations of conventional single
release proton pump inhibitor therapy. Alimen Pharmacol Ther. 2009; 29(9): 928-937.
4. Katsuki H, Yagi H, Arimori K, Nakano M, Fujiyama S, et al. Determination of R(+)- and
S(-)-lansoprazole using chiral stationary-phase liquid chromatography and their
enantioselective pharmacokinetics in humans. Pharma Res. 1996; 13:611-615.
5. Lee RD, Vakily M, Mulford D, Wu J, Atkinson SN. Clinical trial: the effect and timing of
food on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of dexlansoprazole MR, a novel Dual
Delayed Release formulation of a proton pump inhibitor--evidence for dosing flexibility.
Alimen Pharmacol Ther. 2009; 29:824-833.
6. Lee RD, Mulford D, Wu J, Atkinson SN. The effect of time-of-day dosing on the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of dexlansoprazole MR: evidence for dosing
flexibility with a Dual Delayed Release proton pump inhibitor. Alimen Pharmacol Ther.
2010; 9:1001-1011.
7. Sharma P, Shaheen NJ, Perez MC, Pilmer BL, Lee M, Atkinson SN. Peura D. Clinical trials:
healing of erosive oesophagitis with dexlansoprazole MR, a proton pump inhibitor with a
novel dual delayed-release formulation--results from two randomized controlled studies.
Alimen Pharmacol Ther. 2009; 29:731-741.
8. Metz DC, Howden CW, Perez MC, Larsen L, O'Neil J, Atkinson SN. Clinical trial:
dexlansoprazole MR, a proton pump inhibitor with dual delayed-release technology,
effectively controls symptoms and prevents relapse in patients with healed erosive
oesophagitis. Alimen Pharmacol Ther. 2009; 29:742-754.
9. Fass R, Chey WD, Zakko SF, Andhivarothai N, Palmer RN, Perez MC, Atkinson SN.
Clinical trial: the effects of the proton pump inhibitor dexlansoprazole MR on daytime and
nighttime heartburn in patients with nonerosive reflux disease. Alimen Pharmacol Ther.
2009; 29:1261-1272.
10. Vakily M, Wu JT, Atkinson SN. Lack of Electrocardiographic Effect of Dexlansoprazole
MR, a Novel Modified-Release Formulation of the Proton Pump Inhibitor Dexlansoprazole,
in Healthy Subjects. J Clin Pharmacol. (in press 2009).

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 32 of 38

11. Frelinger AL III, Lee RD, Mulford DJ, Wu JT, Nudurupati S, Nigam A, Brooks JK, Bhatt
DL, Michelson AD. A randomized, 2-period, crossover design study to assess the effects
of dexlansoprazole, lansoprazole, esomeprazole and omeprazole on the steady-state
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of clopidogrel in healthy volunteers, J Am Coll
Cardiol 2012;59(14):1304-11. Supplementary Online
Appendix http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S073510971200246X
12. Kukulka M, Wu J, Perez MC. Pharmacokinetics and safety of dexlansoprazole MR in
adolescents with symptomatic GERD. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012; 54:41–47.
13. Gremse D, Gold BD, Pilmer B, Hunt B, Korczowski B, Perez MC. Dual Delayed-Release
dexlansoprazole for healing and maintenance of healed erosive esophagitis: a safety study
in adolescents. Dig Dis Sci. 2019; 64(2):493-502.
14. Gold BD, Pilmer B, Kierkus J, Hunt B, Perez MC, Gremse D. Dexlansoprazole for
heartburn relief in adolescents with symptomatic, nonerosive gastro-esophageal reflux
disease. Dig Dis Sci. 2017; 62(11):3059–3068.

DEXILANT® is a registered trademark of Takeda Pharmaceuticals U.S.A., Inc. and used under
licence by Takeda Canada Inc.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 33 of 38

PART III: PATIENT MEDICATION INFORMATION
READ THIS FOR SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF YOUR MEDICINE
PrDEXILANT®

(dexlansoprazole) delayed release capsules
Read this carefully before you start taking DEXILANT® and each time you get a refill. This
leaflet is a summary and will not tell you everything about this drug. Talk to your healthcare
professional about your medical condition and treatment and ask if there is any new information
about DEXILANT®.
What is DEXILANT® used for?
DEXILANT® is used in people 12 years of age and older to:
• help heal the throat.
o damaged by acid backing up from the stomach to the throat (erosive reflux
esophagitis).
o help maintain the healed throat.
• relieve symptoms of non-erosive gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) such as:
o heartburn during the day and night.
o the burning, burping and sour taste.
How does DEXILANT® work?
DEXILANT® is a medicine called a proton pump inhibitor (PPI). PPIs reduce the amount of acid
your stomach makes.
DEXILANT® capsules contain two different types of granules, tiny dissolving beads that release
medicine. The first granule begins releasing medicine within 1 hour. The rest of the medicine is
released 4-5 hours later, so the medicine continues to work later in the day.
What are the ingredients in DEXILANT®?
Medicinal ingredients: dexlansoprazole.
Non-medicinal ingredients:
Capsule granules: colloidal silicon dioxide, hydroxypropyl cellulose, hypromellose 2910,
low-substituted hydroxypropyl cellulose, magnesium carbonate, methacrylic acid
copolymer, polyethylene glycol 8000, polysorbate 80, sucrose, sugar spheres, talc,
titanium dioxide, and triethyl citrate.
Capsule shell: carrageenan, hypromellose, and potassium chloride.
Capsule shell color: blue contains FD&C Blue No.2 aluminum lake; gray contains black
ferric oxide; and both contain titanium dioxide.
DEXILANT® comes in the following dosage forms:
• Capsules, 30 mg or 60 mg.
Do not use DEXILANT® if:
• you are allergic to DEXILANT® or any of its ingredients. (See What are the ingredients
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 34 of 38

•

in DEXILANT®?).
you are currently taking a medication called rilpivirine

To help avoid side effects and ensure proper use, talk to your healthcare professional before
you take DEXILANT®. Talk about any health conditions or problems you may have,
including if you:
• are taking other medications. (See The following may interact with DEXILANT®).
• have liver problems.
• are pregnant, or planning to become pregnant.
• are breastfeeding or planning to breastfeed.
• have signs of low magnesium in the body (hypomagnesemia) with symptoms such as:
- rapid or irregular heartbeat (palpitations).
- brain symptoms such as dizziness, seizures.
- muscle symptoms such as twitching, cramps, spasms (tetany).
• are due to have a specific blood test (Chromogranin A).
Other warnings you should know about:
DEXILANT® may help your acid-related symptoms. However, you could still have serious
stomach problems. Talk to your doctor if your symptoms continue.
You should take DEXILANT® exactly as prescribed. You will use the lowest dose and shortest
time suitable for your condition. Talk to you doctor if you have any concerns about your
treatment.
Depending on your condition, your doctor may tell you to use this type of medicine (proton pump
inhibitors) for a longer period.
Using proton pump inhibitors for a long time (every day for a year or longer) may increase risks
of broken bones of the hip, wrist or spine. Talk to your doctor about this risk.
Long term use of proton pump inhibitors may interfere with the absorption of Vitamin B12 from
the diet. This may cause a shortage of Vitamin B12 in your body. Talk to your doctor.
Using DEXILANT® for a long period of time may cause a growth in your stomach (polyp),
especially after one year.
Tell your healthcare professional about all the medicines you take, including any drugs,
vitamins, minerals, natural supplements or alternative medicines.
The following may interact with DEXILANT®:
- ampicillin.
- atazanavir.
- nelfinavir.
- saquinavir/ritonavir.
- digoxin.

-

iron salts.
ketoconazole.
warfarin.
tacrolimus.
theophylline.
methotrexate.

How to take DEXILANT®:
• Do not crush or chew capsules or granules.
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 35 of 38

•

Take DEXILANT® at any time of day, with or without food. By either:
• Swallowing capsule whole, with water.
• Or, if you have trouble swallowing capsules, the capsules can be opened and taken with
applesauce or water, as follows:

Applesauce:
DEXILANT® capsules can be opened and the contents sprinkled on a tablespoon of
applesauce. Swallow immediately. Granules should not be chewed.
Water with an Oral Syringe:
1. Open the capsule and empty the granules into a clean container with 20 mL of water.
2. Draw up the water and granules mixture into an oral syringe.
3. Swirl the syringe gently, and give the mixture into the mouth right away. Do not save the
water and granule mixture for later use.
4. Refill the syringe with 10 mL of water, and swirl gently. Give the water into the mouth.
5. Repeat step 4.
Water through a Nasogastric Tube: If you have a nasogastric tube (size 16 French or larger)
1. Open the capsule and empty the granules into a clean container with 20 mL of water.
2. Draw up the water and granules mixture into a catheter-tip syringe.
3. Swirl the syringe gently and connect the syringe to the nasogastric tube. Right away, give
the mixture through the nasogastric tube into the stomach. Do not save the water and
granule mixture for later use.
4. Refill the syringe with 10 mL of water, swirl gently, and flush the nasogastric tube with
water.
5. Repeat step 4.
Usual dose:
The recommended dose is not the same for all conditions. Your doctor will have told you what
dose to take for your condition. Follow your doctor’s directions carefully.
Condition
Healing of erosive
esophagitis.
Maintaining healed
erosive esophagitis.
Symptoms of non-erosive
GERD.

Adult or
Adolescent Dose
60 mg.

How Often

For How Long

Once daily.

Up to 8 weeks.

30 to 60 mg.

Once daily.

30 mg.

Once daily.

Adults: Up to 6 months.
Adolescents aged 12 to 17:
Up to 4 months.
4 weeks.

Overdose:
If you think you have taken too much DEXILANT®, contact your healthcare professional,
DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 36 of 38

hospital emergency department or regional Poison Control Centre immediately, even if there are
no symptoms.
Missed Dose:
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it is almost time for the next dose, skip the
missed dose. Take the next dose at your regular time. Do not double doses.
What are possible side effects from using DEXILANT®?
Like all medications, DEXILANT® can cause side effects. Serious side effects are uncommon.
These are not all the possible side effects you may feel when taking DEXILANT®.
The most common side effects are:
- constipation.
- diarrhea.
- gas.
- headache.
- nausea.
- stomach pain.
Tell your doctor right away if you have any of these symptoms:
New or worsening joint pain
Rash on your cheeks or arms that gets worse in the sun
Your symptoms may get worse after stopping your medication. This may occur as your stomach
may increase the production of acid.
Symptom / effect

Serious side effects and what to do about them
Talk to your healthcare
professional
Only if
In all cases
severe

RARE
Clostridium difficile colitis (Bowel
inflammation). Symptoms include severe
(watery or bloody) diarrhea, fever, abdominal
pain or tenderness.
Liver problems (hepatitis or cholestasis).
Symptoms include dark-coloured urine and
pale stools, yellow tinge to skin and eyes
(jaundice), stomach pain.
Convulsion or seizure.
Serious allergic reactions (anaphylaxis).
Symptoms include severe rash, itching or hives
on the skin, swelling of the face, lips, tongue
or other parts of the body. Shortness of breath,
wheezing or trouble breathing are other
symptoms.

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Stop taking drug
and call your
doctor or
pharmacist







Page 37 of 38

Serious skin reactions. Symptoms include
widespread rash, itching, or hives. Peeling of
the skin, blisters on the skin, mouth, nose, eyes
and genitals are other symptoms.



If you have a troublesome symptom or side effect that is not listed here or becomes bad enough
to interfere with your daily activities, talk to your healthcare professional.
Reporting Side Effects
You can help improve the safe use of health products for Canadians by reporting serious and
unexpected side effects to Health Canada. Your report may help to identify new side effects
and change the product safety information.
3 ways to report:
•
Online at MedEffect (http://hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/medeff/index-eng.php).
•
By calling 1-866-234-2345 (toll-free).
•
By completing a Consumer Side Effect Reporting Form and sending it by:
Fax to 1-866-678-6789 (toll-free), or
Mail to:
Canada Vigilance Program
Health Canada, Postal Locator 1908C
Ottawa, ON
K1A 0K9
Postage paid labels and the Consumer Side Effect Reporting Form are available
at MedEffect (http://hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/medeff/index-eng.php).
NOTE: Contact your health professional if you need information about how to manage your
side effects. The Canada Vigilance Program does not provide medical advice.
Storage:
Store DEXILANT® at room temperature, 15°- 30°C.
Keep out of reach and sight of children.
If you want more information about DEXILANT®:
• Talk to your healthcare professional.
• Find the full product monograph that is prepared for healthcare professionals and includes
this Patient Medication Information by visiting the Health Canada website (http://hcsc.gc.ca/index-eng.php); the manufacturer’s website www.takeda.com/en-ca, or by calling
1-866-295-4636.
This leaflet was prepared by Takeda Canada Inc.
DEXILANT® is a registered trademark of Takeda Pharmaceuticals U.S.A., Inc. and used under
licence by Takeda Canada Inc.
Last Revised: January 06, 2020

DEXILANT® Product Monograph

Page 38 of 38

